# Warm temperatures, cool sponges: the effect of increased temperatures on the Antarctic sponge Isodictya sp.

### Marcelo González-Aravena, Nathan J. Kenny, Magdalena Osorio, Alejandro Font, Ana Riesgo and César A. Cárdenas

#### Reproduced by Mudith Ekanayake, Kavi Raj Acharya, Jaspreet Rishi

## Introduction

<p> <div style="text-align: justify"> Exposure to relatively high temperatures including acute thermal stress or heat shock has been studied extensively on cellular and molecular response but not much information is available on how it effects cold-water species. In the Antarctic, estimates have shown that the temperature of seawater could rise by about 0.6°C to 2.0°C. This, particularly, could have effects on Antarctic-dwelling species as they might be vulnerable to these fluctuating conditions due to their specialization for extremely cold, relatively stable temperature conditions. </div> </p>

<p> <div style="text-align: justify"> In this study, a sponge, Isodictya sp, samples were collected from around the Doumer Island, Palmer Archipelago, western Antarctic Peninsula. 6 samples from adult Isodictya were collected from 10m deep to understand whether this organism can adjust to acute short-term heat stress, by exposing this species to 3°C and 5°C for four hours and the control group was maintained at 0.5°C (n=2). The temperatures corresponded to predicted temperatures under high-end 2080 IPCC-SRES (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Special Report on Emissions Scenarios). </div> </p>

<p> <div style="text-align: justify"> After 4 hours of exposure, RNA was extracted from each sample and amplified using Illumina sequencing. Adapter sequences were removed, and overall quality of the sequences were tested using Fast QC and one low quality control was removed. Low- quality regions were trimmed using Trimmomatic 0.33. Clustering of isoforms was performed natively by Trinity. DeconSeq was used to remove contamination using pre-prepared bacterial, Archean and viral databases, resulting in the final reference assembly. </div> </p>

## Technical Details

<p> <div style="text-align: justify"> Phylogenetic analysis and differential expression analysis were carried out in order to reproduce three figures from the paper; Figure 2A, Figure 2B and Figure 4. When reproducing the phylogenetic analysis, two different approaches were used; the approach which they have used in the paper and another approach using R. Command line blast (BLASTN) (Altschul et al., 1990) was used to extract the HSP70 sequences on HPC, using the sequences from Genbank as search queries. MAFFT sequence alignment tool (Katoh & Standley, 2013) was used to align the sequences and Gblocks (Castresana, 2000) was used to cure the alignments by removing spurious sequences or poorly aligned regions from the multiple sequence alignment. Phylogenetic reconstruction was undertaken under a maximum likelihood framework implemented in RAxML-NG (Silvestro & Michalak, 2012) using the LG+I+G model. Confidence levels were estimated using bootstrap resampling with 1000 replicates. Then the support values were mapped and the tree was visualized using itol tree visualizing tool (Letunik and Bork, 2019). All the annotations were added manually to make the tree look like the original figure in the paper (figure 4). Since it was not mentioned how they rooted their tree, reproduced tree was rooted just looking at the original figure and placing the root manually. </div> </p>

<p> <div style="text-align: justify"> In the other approach, phylogeny reconstruction was attempted to carry out in R. Aligning the sequences, improving the multiple sequence alignment quality and reconstructing the phylogeny were tried to perform using various R packages. But many issues were experienced and expected outcome was not possible. Since phylogeny was constructed using the first approach, many R packages were used to visualize, manipulate and root the tree in R. “ape” (Analysis of Phylogenetics and Evolution in R) was used mainly since it was the most important core package for phylogenies in R. Other packages used were phangorn, phytools and geiger. Tree was visualized as rectangular, radial, polar and also with node numbers in order to root the tree. Tree was rooted according to the node numbers since rooting method was not provided in the paper. </div> </p>

<p> <div style="text-align: justify"> Comparative analyses of gene exprassion was carried out using RSEM tool (Li & Dewey, 2011) as packaged within Trinity (Grabherr et al., 2011), using Bowtie2 (Langmead & Salzberg, 2012) for alignment. According to the paper the treatments were cross compared using edgeR (Robinson, McCarthy & Smyth, 2010) with several parameters; classic pairwise model with a p-value cut off for FDR of 0.0001, a minimum absolute change of 2, and a dispersion setting of 0.1. However, in this differential analysis step, there were some missing pieces and some parameters were not given. Also many supporting data had been used in the analysis, but they were not clearly mentioned in the paper. Because of that, in the middle of the analysis, many issues were experienced. Since some of the intermediate results as well as final expression results were included in the supplementary material, it was possible to incorporate those data when generating the heatmaps. Data preparation for reproducing the heatmaps were carried out in R using many R packages and heatmap generation was performed using the `heatmap.2()` function in `gplot` package. `heatmap.2()` is an enhanced and improved version of the basic `heatmap() function and it provides more options for generating more detailed heatmaps. </div> </p>

## Summary of the Replicated Work

<p> <div style="text-align: justify"> The first figure we tried to replicate was sample correlation between five samples (2 replicates and 1 control). We were able to replicate a similar heatmap showing similar information. There was slight variation among the treatment groups compared to within-sample variation. All the black hues on the heatmap showed little variation, just as the original analysis from the paper. Although, our figure has the position of the 3°C and 5°C treated samples switched. The long branches of the dendrogram and the position of the clusters were remarkably close to what the original authors had published, giving us the idea that there is significant variation among individual samples within the same treatment group than between treatments. </div> </p>

<p> <div style="text-align: justify"> The second figure we tried to replicate was the relative expression heatmaps of differentially expressed contigs of the samples. For this analysis also, we came close to reproduce the original figure from the paper. We had problems figuring out what the original authors had used to cluster the contigs. Because of this, the position or the order of the contigs that we obtained does not match completely. The lower half of the heatmap in the original figure can be found on the top half of the figure that we generated. However, we can interpret that the treated sample had relatively low expression of the contigs than the control samples. Also, the figure shows that there is significant variation among samples compared to between treatments. </div> </p>

<p> <div style="text-align: justify"> The third and final figure that we tried to replicate was the phylogenetic analysis of the HSP70 sequences. They were able to obtain four isoforms of and out of which HSP70A and HSP70B are believed to the paralogues. We were able to replicate this figure using R and some modifications using iTol, as we have mentioned earlier. We could not figure out how they have rooted the tree, so we used our best judgment to manually root the tree so that it resembles the original tree. Our result matches the original tree showing us that HSP70A and HSP70B had some ancestrally shared history which could be explained by the paralogy within Porifera. </div> </p>